.. _model:

Model
=====
For ease of use, all of Galpro's functionalities can be accessed using the ``Model`` class.

API documentation: Model
------------------------
.. autoclass:: galpro.model.Model
    :members:

Training model
--------------
To train a random forest model, the training and testing datasets are required. The model must be given a unique name
using ``model_name``. Besides this, there are other optional parameters such as ``target_features`` and ``save_model``
for passing in a list of all the target features and saving the model respectively::

    import galpro as gp

    target_features = ['$z$', '$\log(M_{\star} / M_{\odot})$']

    model = gp.Model(model_name='model', x_train=x_train, y_train=y_train, x_test=x_test, y_test=y_test,
    target_features=target_features, save_model=True)

If the model is saved, it will be located in the directory ``/galpro/model_name/`` as a ``.sav`` file. The ``Model``
class can also be used to load a previously trained model by specifying its name via ``model_name``. Once a new model
has been trained or a previously trained model has been loaded, it can be utilised.

Testing model
-------------
The trained model can be used to generate point predictions and posterior PDFs using::

    model.point_estimate(save_estimate=True, make_plots=True)
    model.posterior(save_posteriors=True, make_plots=True, on_the_fly=False)

The ``point_estimates`` function will return an array of point estimates of test objects. If the point predictions and
PDFs are saved, they will be stored as ``.h5`` (Hierarchical Data Format) files in the subdirectories
``/galpro/model_name/point_estimates/`` and ``/galpro/model_name/posteriors/`` respectively. The plots will be saved in
the ``/plots/`` folder.

On-the-fly PDFs
---------------
Galpro has the ability to generate PDFs on the fly, thus eliminating the problem of storage. Galpro can be easily
incorporated into research codes with the following::

    posterior = model.posterior(save_posteriors=False, make_plots=False, on_the_fly=True)

    for sample in range(no_samples):
        sample_posterior = next(posterior)

In this instance, the ``on_the_fly`` parameter is set to ``True``. By calling ``next(posterior)`` the function will
return posterior PDFs of test objects one at a time. Naturally, the other parameters are set to ``False``, and the
following functionalities are not available if generating PDFs in this mode.

Validating model
----------------
The posterior PDFs generated by the trained model can be validated using::

    model.validate(save_validation=True, make_plots=True)

Marginal PDFs are validated using the framework developed by
`Gneiting et al. (2007) <https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/file/index/docid/363242/filename/jrssb1b.pdf>`_,
and multivariate PDFs are validated using the multivariate extension of the framework, developed by
`Ziegel and Gneiting. (2014) <https://projecteuclid.org/download/pdfview_1/euclid.ejs/1418313582>`_.
A brief introduction to the methods can be found in our paper (`Mucesh et al. 2020 <https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.05928>`_).
The function will return a ``.h5`` file object, and the different modes of validation can be accessed using the keys,
``pits``, ``coppits``, ``marginal_calibration`` and ``kendall_calibration``. The validation is stored in the subdirectory
``/galpro/model_name/validation/``.

Plotting
--------
Galpro can generate various plots::

    model.plot.scatter() # Creates scatter plots of point predictions.
    model.plot.marginal() # Creates marginal PDF plots.
    model.plot.joint_pdf() # Creates joint PDF plots.
    model.plot.corner() # Creates a corner style plot for multivariate PDFs.
    model.plot.pit() # Plots the probability integral transform (PIT) distribution.
    model.plot.coppit() # Plots the copula probability integral transform (copPIT) distribution.
    model.marginal_calibration() # Plots the marginal calibration.
    model.kendall_calibration() # Plots the kendall calibration.

These plotting functions can take in two optional parameters which are ``show`` and ``save``. By default, these are set
to ``False`` and ``True`` respectively. All plots are saved in the ``/plots/`` folder in the respective subdirectory.
The same plots can also be created by setting ``make_plots=True`` when running ``model.point_estimate``,
``model.posterior`` or ``model.validate``. Additionally, these functions can also be used to recreate the different
plots, given that the model and the necessary ``.h5`` files have been saved in the previous run.


Configuration
-------------
The hyperparameters associated with the random forest algorithm are defined in the ``conf.py`` file. We expect the
default hyperparameters to work well in most situations. However, if the user wishes to tune the hyperparameter to their
liking, they can do so by modifying their values in the configuration file before training a model.

The plotting aesthetics are also defined in the same configuration file. The user can tweak them to their preference by
stating the matplotlib or seaborn settings accordingly.
